# Contributing

This document provides guidelines around how anyone can contribute to improving and expanding the TEMNOS database. This database is intended to be a living document and a community resource, so community contributions are welcome. Please make sure to read these guidelines before creating a ticket or attempting to get in touch through another means.
## Types of contributions
### Identifying errors
The datasets contained in TEMNOS represent a mixture of human-entered and automated data entry, so like any other scholarly output, they are intrinsically prone to potential typographic errors or issues with script functionality. If you find an error, no matter how small it is, feel free to create a ticket. If you think you found an issue but aren't 100% sure, err on the side of caution and create an issue; the worst case scenario is the ticket just gets closed if it's not an issue. Errors are the highest priority tickets, but note that unless they are systemic issues, they will be fixed in the next release (i.e. I will accrue changes before making a periodic new release). The intention here is to avoid an excessive number of versions which differ by perhaps only a single character (e.g., if all I did between versions was fix a year in a citation).
### Adding data
Augmentation of existing datasets is also an important part of maintaining TEMNOS. Because of my personal limitations (e.g., which languages I can read), professional limitations (e.g., which journals are inaccessible to me), and time limitations (recall I am not employed in an academic research capacity nor seeking to be employed in such a capacity), there will always be more data to add than I have time for. Adding data is probably one of the best ways for other people to contribute! However, there are certain restrictions and guidelines around doing so: 

Firstly, any new data must be reproducible from the literature. In other words, providing data from personal observations, regardless of whether you have supporting photos or other documentation, cannot be accepted in TEMNOS. I have a fair bit of unpublished data, either related to ongoing research projects or simply accrued over my many years of doing research, which are not incorporated into this database unless voucher literature exists for them, so other people's similar data also cannot be incorporated (this includes data related to manuscripts between 'in review' and 'in press'). 

Secondly, data from resources that lack clear long-term preservation and public access standards (e.g., museum databases) also cannot be included in TEMNOS because these could disappear overnight for a variety of reasons (whereas scholarly literature is highly unlikely to do so or may have been preserved by third parties). There are also other potential obstacles to harvesting some of these resources (e.g., copyright and fair use policies, or lack thereof).

Finally, some of the current and planned data in TEMNOS involves measurements. Until I (and anyone else who wants to partake) have established guidelines to standardize extracting quantitative data from figures or other outputs that are not verbatim text listings of measurements (e.g., from 3D volumes), these data will not be accepted. In short, if an average person cannot reasonably access and validate the data that you wish to provide, I cannot add it to TEMNOS. If you are considering adding a lot of data from a particular source or type of source but are not sure if it is acceptable, please provide a small sample in a ticket before potentially spending a lot of time for data that cannot be added.
### Suggesting new datasets
Adding new datasets or data-like content is the last element of maintaining TEMNOS. From bibliographic information to phylogenetic data, there are plenty of possibilities, many of which I am sure that I haven't thought about. If you have ideas, no matter the scale, feel free to propose them, even if you will not be able to contribute much/at all to the actual data collection! Note that I am also considering directions that are not strictly "data" that can serve as community resources (e.g., 'primer'-like content, see the Data Curation Network's primers for the general gist). Managing those resources might require another repository to account for licensing, but we can jump that bridge if we get there.
## Who can contribute
There are no formal requirements for someone to contribute to TEMNOS. If you are interested and willing to agree to following a standardized set of practices, you are eligible to contribute! Understandably, much of this work requires access to scholarly literature (other sources like Wikipedia will not be accepted for TEMNOS), so someone without access to common journals may be more limited in their ability to contribute. You do not need to be able to "complete" an entire dataset to contribute, so anyone without access to paywalled literature should not be discouraged by that attribute. For example, if someone wants to contribute to etymological data, they can focus on the names published in publicly accessible literature. There is no sort of "minimum required time" involved (this is obviously unpaid work), but ability complete work that you commit to, in a timely fashion, or to communicate that you're no longer able to work on something, is important.  

Like any other collaborative approach, I (as the lead for this database) reserve the right to determine who can contribute and in what capacity. Anyone's involvement is contingent upon them adhering to the prescribed standards and collaborating in a collegial fashion. 

## How-to
### Why GitHub
GitHub is designed for code and realistically should not normally be used for regular management of research data, especially static/immutable data, and this is reflected in the interface design and interminology. The reason I am using GitHub to manage this database is because it is well-suited to non-static development of an object (a living database in this instance) and facilitates dynamic collaboration where the current status and history of ongoing and resolved issues can be viewed publicly. My hope is that this will 1) promote transparency; and 2) avoid duplication / redundancy of raised issues in a fashion that would not be possible, for example, if people communicated through a mix of emails, text, social media DMs, etc. Especially for augmentation of existing datasets and creation of new datasets, I have plenty of ideas, so ensuring that future additions to TEMNOS are publicly logged will facilitate conversation and avoid a 'Darwin-Wallace' problem of working on the same problem without knowing it. GitHub has a built-in system called 'issues' where a ticket can be created, edited, tagged, discussed, and viewed after its resolution; this system will be used to manage any potential contributions of any nature and to track contributions ([assignees and reviewers system](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/assigning-issues-and-pull-requests-to-other-github-users)) if other people wish to collaborate. GitHub is an easy-to-use platform (and widely used by researchers) and can be learned quickly to at least a level to contribute if you haven't used it before. Again, the point of using GitHub is to keep everything in the open, so contributors should not attempt to raise issues with me through other means of communication like email; I will not respond to them. The only exception is if you identify a critical, breaking problem (e.g., I upload a new file of a data file and half of the rows are frameshifted) and need to immediately get in touch with me or have a rapid back-and-forth (in which case I will probably create a ticket afterwards).
### Creating tickets
If you would like to contribute to TEMNOS, please make sure to review the [list of issues](https://github.com/bryanmgee/temnos/issues) (both open and closed) to ensure that your idea/comment has not already had an issue created for it. If one exists, please comment on that one, even if it is closed. Creating issues is easy, but if you have never used GitHub before, you can review their documentation at this link. Anyone with a GitHub account can create issues in a public repository - no special permissions are required. Look at previous tickets that are similar to what you are creating a ticket for to get an idea of how to try and standardize tickets. Most items should have a new ticket created for them rather than tacking on to an existing one; the one exception to this is that I plan to make a single ticket for newly published literature with some data that can be added to existing datasets, and this should be threaded onto.
### Implementing changes to existing files
If you have used GitHub before for collaboration, you will be familiar with forking, pull requests, etc. Because TEMNOS is entirely data right now (although some code may be added down the line), the workflow considerations for contributors to actually make edits to files and suggest them through pull requests is a little different. Right now, please do not initiate pull requests unless I ask you to do so. If there is measurable interest from other people in contributing, I will need to figure out the best workflow for managing non-public editing. You can obviously fork the repository for your own purposes and download and edit files yourself, but I will handle making edits to the versions that will be updated. If you create a ticket, do not worry about 'managing' it. If a discussion ensues with other people, I will be monitoring it, and I will take care of assigning tags and closing/reopening tickets, although feel free to do so if you have experience with Git workflows and know which metadata to attach - I can always edit something later if needed.
### Providing data
Right now, I am the only contributor to this Git repo, so I am the only person who can make direct edits to the contents. If you have tabular data to contribute, please attach it in a relevant ticket in an appropriate format (.xlsx, .csv, .tsv, .txt; no tables in .docx, .pdf, etc.), preferably so that it can just be directly copied into the master file. If there are any associated references that need to be added to the preprint, please include those (ideally formatted in the same fashion, [APA-7](https://apastyle.apa.org/style-grammar-guidelines/references/examples)) in an appropriate format (.docx, .txt; preferably not in .pdf). 
### Getting credit
Right now, I have no idea how much external engagement this database will see, so the guidelines around how credit will be recognized for contributions are a work in progress. For 'entry-based' data (i.e. tabular data where one row is one entry), I will add columns for 'entry' (who created/contributed the entry, will probably be a single person) and 'edit' (for anyone who contributed to editing it, can be multiple people). If someone is a frequent and substantial contributor and is willing to commit to following the workflows I set up for maintaining the database, I will consider adding them in the '[collaborator](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/setting-up-and-managing-your-personal-account-on-github/managing-access-to-your-personal-repositories/inviting-collaborators-to-a-personal-repository)' role on GitHub and as a coauthor on the dataset/preprint. The intermediary step will likely be directing people to fork the repository and initiate a pull request, which will automatically add the '[contributor](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/exploring-projects-on-github/contributing-to-a-project)' role. The level that warrants 'frequent and substantial' is necessarily vague at present and will hopefully be constrained more in the future. Definitely reach out to me if you are interested in contributing on a regular/measurable basis (this can be over email, don't make a ticket for this)!

## Potential FAQs
**I would like to reuse some of the data in TEMNOS for a peer-reviewed article; are there any recommendations for how to do so?**
* Yes, there are a few best practices to follow here. The first is to save a raw copy of whichever dataset(s) you are using and then to duplicate that/those files if you need to make edits. Whether you make any changes to the datasets provided here or not, you should publish them in a data repository like Zenodo or Open Science Framework (OSF) alongside your manuscript; this will ensure that anyone seeking to reproduce your specific study does not potentially get the wrong version if they have to come here and fish around for the right version. **Since I have released these datasets into the public domain, you cannot copyright them, so please make sure to publish them under the [CC0 license waiver](https://creativecommons.org/public-domain/cc0/).** Next, you should make sure to appropriately cite the raw data. Please refer to the 'Citation' section of the README file for more details. 

**Do you (Bryan) require authorship if I use these datasets for articles?**
* No, I am of the belief that scientific data should be made as freely available as possible, without attaching these sorts of conditions. If you would like to offer me authorship, feel free to reach out via email, but I have no expectations of even being contacted ahead of the publication of an article that uses these data. However, if you are not that familiar with temnospondyl data, I would highly recommend that you get in touch just so that I can talk you through any potential caveats or nuances that could be important for your work.

**I have never used GitHub before; is there some other way for me to contribute?**
* Right now, unless you literally have no means of accessing the internet (in which case there are probably other hurdles to clear in order to contribute), contributions (feedback, data, input, etc.) are only accepted through GitHub. This is an intentional decision meant to streamline the process of managing the database while ensuring that the most proximal discourse is publicly available. GitHub is quite easy to learn how to use, at least enough to contribute in the ways that are permitted right now, and it may be a useful tool to gain familiarity with for research (mostly software) management. You can find GitHub's 'Getting Started' guide [here](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started). The only things that should be sent through private channels (email preferably) are private matters, like discussing a specific research project.

*Last updated: 2024/09/22*
