# README for TEMNOS data file D2: Temnospondyl specimen listing

## About

This is the README documentation for TEMNOS data file 2 (D2): Temnospondyl specimen listing. This README file blends the style of a conventional software/data README file with a descriptor paper style of description. 

* Current version: 1.0.0 (initial release)
* Publication date: 2024/09/22

## Collection and standardization

All data in this dataset were collected manually from the literature, with the taxonomy then standardized to a consistent framework through file D1. This includes articles, books, theses/dissertations (where available), posters, and preprints (except when novel taxa are being proposed). It records information on the individual specimens' attributes, including their unique identifier, what skeletal element(s) is included, whether the specimen is a type specimen or not, and metadata on the geographic, stratigraphic, and temporal occurrence of the specimen. 

## Caveats

The same limitations of the utilized taxonomic framework that were discussed for file D1 apply here as well. The primary caveat of version 1.0.0 is that the taxonomic sampling is (intentionallly) incomplete. North American metoposaurids (mostly indeterminate material and that referred to *Anaschisma browni*), micromelerpetids, branchiosaurids, and non-stereospondyl stereospondylomorphs have not been completely surveyed due to a combination of factors, including: relatively large number of specimens (each clade includes at least several hundred published specimens and certainly thousands of total known specimens); and a skew towards relevant publications that are in non-English (particularly for the non-metoposaurids), many of which also have no digital version/record. 

Several additional caveats apply to the data that are included. Firstly, there are a small number of specimens that have been listed for different skeletal regions of different taxa in the literature (problematic duplicates; e.g., ISI A 57 has been listed as both the holotype of the lapillopsid *Manubrantlia khaki* and as a paratype of the metoposaurid *Panthasaurus maleriensis*; Yates & Sengupta, 2002; Chakravorti & Sengupta, 2018) and a different small set of specimens that are apparently not duplicates but that are catalogued with the same specimen number (usually these are within the same institution and for the same taxon; e.g., three individuals of *Trematosaurus brauni* all catalogued under MSB G 366; Schoch, 2019a). There are also a few instances in which it is unclear whether a specimen listing with a number including a hyphen or dash was a batch listing (i.e. a continuous range of many specimens) or single specimen that uses hyphenation to delineate something else (e.g., individual elements within a single specimen/individual); an example is Schoch & Milner's (2014:104) listing for *Plagioscutum ochevi*: "PIN 2430/1-79, 81-200, isolated bones from the type locality." Unless a specimen listing with this punctuation was clearly stated to be a single specimen, the listing was parsed as a continuous range (e.g., 2430/1, 2430/2, 2430/3, etc. for the above example). 

As with file D1, Some specimens have been transferred to other collections and may presently have both a different institutional acronym and number than is recorded in the literature. Unless I could find a public source (museum database, literature, etc.) that specifically established how a particular specimen had been treated (rather than blanket statements or examples for another specimen from the same institution), the original specimen listing is given. For example, UT-BEG (University of Texas, Burea of Economic Geology) collections were folded into TMM (Texas Memorial Museum) collections, but the available data (e.g., literature) do not clearly show that the holotype of *Broiliellus olsoni*, UT-BEG 31189.8, was transferred with the same number or renumbered, so the original number is listed here. As there are other instances in which the specimen number was definitively changed in addition to the acronym (e.g., UCLA VP 3686 to UCMP 203686 for *Nanobamus macrorhinus*), a static specimen number should not be assumed. The same applies to the formulation of specimen numbers that may include other characters like punctuation or letters. The UCLA collection is a good example for avoiding blanket metadata updates, as some material went to the UCMP while other material went to the Carnegie Museum (e.g., the holotype of *Ecolsonia cutlerensis*, formerly UCLA VP 1734 and now CM 47801).

Little standardization has been done to date on the skeletal element(s) included in a specimen. To begin with, the field refers to 'includes,' rather than 'comprises,' to indicate that what is described for a specimen in the literature may not represent the full composition of a specimen (e.g., a postcrania-focused study may omit reference to a specimen's mandibular material). The listed descriptions are not verbatim from the literature and include some standardization around vague characterizations, but semantic differences (e.g., the difference between a partial skull and a skull fragment) have yet to be addressed. I would not recommend scraping this section as a means of trying to calculate relative skeletal abundance at present (see planned future augmentation below).

Finally, standardization of the geographic, stratigraphic, and temporal occurrence data is incomplete at best. Locality information varies widely in the literature, and most localities either do not have unique identifiers (e.g., UCMP V 6148 for what is commonlly called Gregory's Quarry in the Redonda Formation of New Mexico; 'North Apache Canyon Quarry 2' in the UCMP database and also NMMNH locality 485) or do not publish these identifiers. Evolution of names, either generalization/specification (e.g., '1 mile from location X' becomes simply 'location X') or complete replacement, as well as different names utilized by different institutions, contributes to substantial ambiguity. In version 1.0.0., unless it was unambiguously clear that multiple names pertain to the same locality (e.g., via presence of a holotype consistently referred to a set of locality names), this dataset is conservative in not merging potentially related localities. Most locality/regional literature has yet to be consulted to facilitate this metadata standardization (see planned future augmentation below).

## Planned future augmentation

The following are areas where this data file is intended to be expanded. If you would like to contribute or suggest other areas, please refer to the CONTRIBUTNG.md document.

* Completion of initial survey of major clades, initialization of survey for higher-level indeterminate records (e.g., Temnospondyli indet. specimens).
* Cross-referencing against PBDB localities/occurrences to standardize location information.
* Inclusion of more specific temporal information (at least to the level of stages). This information has been collected for some specimens, but shifting chronostratigraphic frameworks (e.g., long versus short Norian) introduce complications to using verbatim characterizations from the literature.
* Standardization of skeletal representation. This includes the addition of region-specific presence/absence fields, as in file D4 (e.g., cranial, hemimandibular, axial, forelimb), to permit an easy summarization of what percentage of published specimens contain an element from region X. More granular scoring at the level of individual element, their count, and the siding of each element is also being considered, but especially for the skull and lower jaw, this could prove to be extremely time-intensive. Standardization of the full skeletal description (e.g., what constitutes 'partial skull') is also planned.
